Copy edit on Focus page [TECH REVIEW ROUND] (#10432)
flutter/website: src/content/ui/interactivity/focus.md

**Do create `FocusNode` and `FocusScopeNode` objects in a stateful widget.**
: When you finish using `FocusNode` and `FocusScopeNode`,
  you need to dispose of them.
  For this reason, only create them inside of a stateful widget's `State` object.
  You can override the stateful widget's `dispose` method to dispose of the
  focus objects.

**Do set the `debugLabel` of a focus node widget.**
: This helps with diagnosing focus issues.

**Do call the `requestFocus()` method on a node to request the primary focus.**
: Call this method from an node that has passed a node
  it owns to a descendant where you want to the focus.

**Do use `focusNode.requestFocus()`.**
: You don't need to call `FocusScope.of(context).requestFocus(focusNode)`.
  The `focusNode.requestFocus()` method works the same with better performance.

**Don't allocate a new `FocusNode` object for each build.**
: This can cause memory leaks.
  It might also cause a loss of focus when the widget rebuilds while
  the node has focus.

**Don't use the same `FocusNode` for multiple widgets.**
: If you do, the widgets fight over managing the attributes of the node.
  That might result in an unexpected outcome.

> **Don't set the `onKeyEvent` callback on a `FocusNode` that `Focus` manages.**

Reviewer: This is just a general case of "don't set attributes on focus nodes unless you use `Focus.withExternalFocusNode()`"

If you already have a focus node, and want to set `onKeyEvent` on it, then you can do that, you just need to call `Focus.withExternalFocusNode()` so it doesn't unintentionally overwrite it.

Author: I had to tease this out using Gemini. See [this doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10F1lG4KY6s6SODHOA6bMudInWuevChV7S6bSERcDHPY/edit?usp=sharing&resourcekey=0-cmiSq-PoxiPb9EnrG6dVWg) for why I rephrased as I did.

> : To set focus to respond to a key event, use an `onKeyEvent` handler.

Reviewer: This paragraph is about how to set up an onKeyEvent handler, but the heading is a warning about setting it on the node. They don't quite go together. I think maybe keep this paragraph, but change the heading, since that's covered by the `withExternalFocusNode` discussion?

Author: See previous.

  Surround the desired widget subtree with a new [`Focus`][] widget
  with its `onKeyEvent` attribute set to your handler.
  If you don't want the widget to be able to take primary focus,
  set `canRequestFocus: false` on it.
  Do this because the `onKeyEvent` attribute on the `Focus` widget
  can be set to something else in a later build. If that happens,
  the attribute overwrites the `onKeyEvent` handler you set on the node.
  This applies to a `FocusScopeNode` that a [`FocusScope`][] widget
  manages.

### Tell a node to give up focus

The `FocusNode.unfocus()` API tells a node to "give up the focus".
While it does remove focus from the node,
note that you can't "unfocus" all nodes.
If you remove focus from a node, it must pass the focus somewhere else,
since there is _always_ a primary focus. When a node calls `unfocus()`,
focus can pass to one of two nodes.
It can pass to either the nearest `FocusScopeNode`
or a node in the same scope that had focus earlier.

> Which one depends upon the `disposition` argument you give to `unfocus()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which one is chosen depends upon the `disposition` argument you give to `unfocus()`.
```

To better control where the focus passes when you remove it from a node,
you have two options.
You can choose to set focus to another node or use the focus traversal mechanism.
To find another node, this mechanism can use the `focusInDirection`,

> `nextFocus`, or `previousFocus` methods on `FocusNode`.

Reviewer: I think it would be better to talk about the `UnfocusDisposition` options first before this paragraph, since this is really describing an option to using `unfocus`, and the options go with `unfocus`, not this.

Also, you could add explicitly focusing another node with `requestFocus()` to the list of options somewhere, so there are three options, really.

Author: All I have to work with is https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/UnfocusDisposition.html. If there's something else I should consider, I'm happy to take suggestions.

When calling `unfocus()`, you can set the `disposition` argument. 
It allows two modes for passing focus:

* [`UnfocusDisposition.scope`][]:
  The argument defaults to this option.
  It gives the focus to the nearest parent focus scope.

>   If the something moves the focus to the next node with `FocusNode.nextFocus`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If then something moves the focus to the next node with `FocusNode.nextFocus`,
```

  the app starts with the "first" focusable item in the scope.

* `UnfocusDisposition.previouslyFocusedChild`:
  The `previouslyFocusedChild` disposition searches the scope to find the

>   last focused child and request focus on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  most recently focused child and requests focus on it.
```

  If no child had focus before, this disposition works like `scope`.

## Allow a control to receive focus

The `Focus` widget owns and manages a focus node.
It performs the following functions as the workhorse of the focus system:

* Attaches and detaches the focus node it owns from the focus tree
* Manages the attributes and callbacks of the focus node
* Enables discovery of focus nodes attached to the widget
  tree through its static functions

To allow a widget subtree to obtain focus, wrap the `Focus` widget around it.
This works during the focus traversal process or when a passed
`FocusNode` calls `requestFocus`.
Combined with a gesture detector calling `requestFocus`,
it can receive focus when tapped or clicked.

If you don't create a `FocusNode` object for the `Focus` widget to manage,
it creates its own.
To allow focus control from a parent widget, create your own`FocusNode`.
To control its focus, this object can then call `requestFocus()` on the node.
To access the functionality of a `FocusNode`,
change the attributes of the `Focus` widget itself.

To implement Flutter's own focus functionality,

> its controls use the [`FocusableActionDetector`][] widget.

Reviewer: (and you can too!)

## Focus use cases

Some situations where you might use the focus system include:

- [Receiving/handling key events](#key-events)
- [Implementing a custom component that needs to be focusable](#focus-widget)
- [Receiving notifications when the focus changes](#change-notifications)
- [Changing or defining the "tab order" of focus traversal in an app](#focustraversalpolicy)
- [Defining groups of controls that should be traversed together](#focustraversalgroup-widget)
- [Preventing some controls in an app from being focusable](#controlling-what-gets-focus)

## Implement the focus system in your app

The `FocusNode` and [`FocusScopeNode`][] objects implement the mechanics
of the focus system.
Like render objects, these objects live longer than widgets and
hold the focus state and attributes.
This allows focus nodes to persist between builds of the widget tree.
Together, these objects form the focus tree data structure.

The original intent was for these widgets to control some focus system aspects.
They would've been developer-facing objects.
Over time, they evolved to implement details of the focus system.
To prevent breaking existing apps,

> they still contain public interfaces for their attributes.

Author: It was in the original copy. I can remove if you prefer?

  Surround the desired widget subtree with a new `Focus` widget
  with its `onKeyEvent` attribute set to your handler.
  If you don't want the widget to be able to take primary focus,
  set `canRequestFocus: false` on it.
  Do this because the `onKeyEvent` attribute on the `Focus` widget
  can be set to something else in a later build. If that happens,
  the attribute overwrites the `onKeyEvent` handler you set on the node.
  This applies to a `FocusScopeNode` that a `FocusScope` widget manages.

### Tell a node to give up focus

The `FocusNode.unfocus()` API tells a node to "give up the focus".
While it does remove focus from the node,
note that you can't "unfocus" all nodes.
If you remove focus from a node, it must pass the focus somewhere else,
since there is _always_ a primary focus. When a node calls `unfocus()`,
focus can pass to one of two nodes.
It can pass to either the nearest `FocusScopeNode`
or a node in the same scope that had focus earlier.
Which one depends upon the `disposition` argument you give to `unfocus()`.
To better control where the focus passes when you remove it from a node,
you have two options.

> You can set focus to another node or use the focus traversal mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set focus to another node explicitly or use the focus traversal mechanism.
```

To find another node, this mechanism can use the `focusInDirection`,
`nextFocus`, or `previousFocus` methods on `FocusNode`.

When calling `unfocus()`, you can set the `disposition` argument. 
It allows two modes for passing focus:

- [`UnfocusDisposition.scope`][]:
  The argument defaults to this option.
  It gives the focus to the nearest parent focus scope.
  If the something moves the focus to the next node with `FocusNode.nextFocus`,
  the app starts with the "first" focusable item in the scope.

- `UnfocusDisposition.previouslyFocusedChild`:
  The `previouslyFocusedChild` disposition searches the scope to find the
  last focused child and request focus on it.
  If no child had focus before, this disposition works like `scope`.

:::important
Without another scope, focus moves to the root scope node of the focus system,
`FocusManager.rootScope`.

> This wouldn't be a desired result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This wouldn't be a desired result, because focus traversal will stop working.
```

description: How to use the focus system in your Flutter app.
---

This article explains how to direct keyboard input.
If your app uses a physical keyboard, like desktop and web apps,
keep reading. If your app won't use a physical keyboard,

> you can skip this guide.

Reviewer 2: Just to double-check - is focus used for accessibility scenarios on mobile?

Author: Not necessarily: it's any app that can switch between traditional (key/mouse) input and touch input. @gspencergoog , did I read that right?

Reviewer: There's a separate thing which is accessibility focus on mobile, and they're different things.

There is focus on mobile, but only if you connect a bluetooth or USB keyboard and/or mouse and use it.  If you switch between mouse and touch, the focus highlights will turn on and off depending on which you used last.

  it owns to a descendant where you want to the focus.

**Do use `focusNode.requestFocus()`.**
: You don't need to call `FocusScope.of(context).requestFocus(focusNode)`.
  The `focusNode.requestFocus()` method works the same with better performance.

**Don't allocate a new `FocusNode` object for each build.**
: This can cause memory leaks.
  It might also cause a loss of focus when the widget rebuilds while
  the node has focus.

**Don't use the same `FocusNode` for multiple widgets.**
: If you do, the widgets fight over managing the attributes of the node.
  That might result in an unexpected outcome.

**Don't set the `onKeyEvent` callback on a `FocusNode` that `Focus` manages.**
: To set focus to respond to a key event, use an `onKeyEvent` handler.
  Surround the desired widget subtree with a new [`Focus`][] widget
  with its `onKeyEvent` attribute set to your handler.
  If you don't want the widget to be able to take primary focus,
  set `canRequestFocus: false` on it.
  Do this because the `onKeyEvent` attribute on the `Focus` widget
  can be set to something else in a later build. If that happens,
  the attribute overwrites the `onKeyEvent` handler you set on the node.

>   This applies to a `FocusScopeNode` that a [`FocusScope`][] widget manages.

Author: Not sure how to do this.

focus can pass to one of two nodes.
It can pass to either the nearest `FocusScopeNode`
or a node in the same scope that had focus earlier.
Which one depends upon the `disposition` argument you give to `unfocus()`.
To better control where the focus passes when you remove it from a node,
you have two options.
You can choose to set focus to another node or use the focus traversal mechanism.
To find another node, this mechanism can use the `focusInDirection`,
`nextFocus`, or `previousFocus` methods on `FocusNode`.

When calling `unfocus()`, you can set the `disposition` argument. 
It allows two modes for passing focus:

* [`UnfocusDisposition.scope`][]:
  The argument defaults to this option.
  It gives the focus to the nearest parent focus scope.
  If the something moves the focus to the next node with `FocusNode.nextFocus`,
  the app starts with the "first" focusable item in the scope.

* `UnfocusDisposition.previouslyFocusedChild`:
  The `previouslyFocusedChild` disposition searches the scope to find the
  last focused child and request focus on it.
  If no child had focus before, this disposition works like `scope`.

> :::important

Author: Edge cases are never great to include. Removing this aside.

Together, these objects form the focus tree data structure.

These nodes act as a somewhat opaque handle.
To focus a descendant widget,
an ancestor widget can use this handle to call the `requestFocus()` method.
The ancestor widget can also request that Flutter give focus
to a descendant widget.
If setting other attributes on the focus node
like `onKey` or `skipTraversal`,
use the [`Focus.withExternalFocusNode`][] or
[`FocusScope.withExternalFocusNode`][] constructors
This avoids an accidental reset of the attributes.

### Follow focus best practices

Some dos and don'ts around using these objects include:

**Do create `FocusNode` and `FocusScopeNode` objects in a stateful widget.**
: When you finish using `FocusNode` and `FocusScopeNode`,
  you need to dispose of them.
  For this reason, only create them inside of a stateful widget's `State` object.
  You can override the stateful widget's `dispose` method to dispose of the
  focus objects.

**Do set the `debugLabel` of a focus node widget.**
: This helps with diagnosing focus issues.

**Do call the `requestFocus()` method on a node to request the primary focus.**

> : Call this method from an ancestor that has passed a node

Author: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
: Call this method from a node that has passed a node
```

}
```

### Set a focus traversal policy

When given a request and the current focus node,
the `FocusTraversalPolicy` object determines the next widget.
The requests (member functions) can include `findFirstFocus`,
`findLastFocus`, `next`, `previous`, and `inDirection`.

`FocusTraversalPolicy` abstracts concrete policies like
`ReadingOrderTraversalPolicy`, `OrderedTraversalPolicy` and the
[`DirectionalFocusTraversalPolicyMixin`][] classes.

To use a `FocusTraversalPolicy`, give one to a `FocusTraversalGroup`,
It determines the widget subtree in which the policy will be effective.
Avoid calling the member functions of the class directly.

> The focus system should use these functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These functions are used by the focus system.
```

## Manage focus

The [`FocusManager`][] maintains the current primary focus for the system.

> Users of the focus system might only use three properties of this API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users of the focus system typically use three main properties of this API.
```

**`FocusManager.instance.primaryFocus` property**
: This contains the current focus node with focus.
  It can be accessed from the global `primaryFocus` field.

**`FocusManager.instance.highlightStrategy` property**
: Widgets that change between touch and mouse and keyboard input
  need this property. This property tells `FocusManager` how to

>   interpret changes to app user device input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  interpret changes in which input devices the user is using.
```

  The `highlightStrategy` property allows one of three values:

  * `automatic` (default):
    Switch focus highlighting based on the most recent input events
  * `alwaysTouch`:
    Lock to touch focus highlighting
  * `alwaysTraditional`:
    Lock to traditional focus highlighting

**`FocusManager.instance.highlightMode` property**
: The `highlightStrategy` value determines the `highlightMode` value.

  * When an app user navigates with touch, Flutter hides the focus highlight.
  * When the app user switches to a mouse or keyboard,
    Flutter shows the focus highlight.

> The provided focus widgets in Flutter know how to use these properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The provided focusable widgets (and `FocusableActionDetector`) in Flutter know how to use these properties.
```
